--- 
layout: post 
title: What is a Financial Asset?
author: Guillaume Rabault
categories: [Finance]
tags: [Instruments] 
fullview: false 
--- 

*This post stresses that from a
portfolio management perspective, price dynamics should be derived from
cash flow and expected return assumptions. One cannot hope to identify
the price dynamics of a financial security without considering its cash
flows.*

* * * * *

There is a great variety of financial instruments in our modern world.
It is not necessarily useful to try to provide a generic definition.
From the point of view of this project (InvestmentMath) however, I would
like to stress a particular perspective, using the example of an equity
contract. Students who have been exposed to the standard derivatives
pricing literature quite often associate an equity contract with a
geometric stochastic differential equation (other posts will clarify the
meaning of this): $$\frac{dP_{t}}{P_{t}}=rdt+\sigma dW_{t},$$
where $r$ is the expected return, $\sigma$ is the volatility of the
price and $(W_{t})$ is a Brownian motion. More generically, we are
given a price process parameterized by its expected return and its
volatility, which can then be statistically fitted to actual data. But
within the derivatives literature, no effort is made to understand where
this process is coming from. The perspective is indeed that the equity
price process is a given and its specification will serve to define the
value of new financial instruments which are derived (thus the name!)
from the equity contract. As it turns out, the expected return is
usually irrelevant to that project. There is nothing wrong with this
perspective. From an investment point of view however, the expected
return is a crucial variable. We want to form return expectations. We
cannot simply take them from past data, especially not from recent past
data. In the same way, we want to understand the risk we run by holding
the equity contract. A short sample of the equity price might tell us
very little about this. From our perspective, the emphasis should not be
on the price process but rather on the cash flows generated by the
equity contract.  We need to understand and model the cash flows. The
price process will be  inferred ant its derivation which will force us
to think about the market clearing process. In particular, the expected
return will have to reconcile the market price with the expected cash
flows. **We thus propose to think of a financial asset as a contract
that gives ownership of a stream of cash flows**. We should be
suspicious of assets that do not give right to an income stream. There
are some with positive value in the market. The bills in our wallet are
a good example. This is the subject of very interesting economic theory.
But the case of financial assets with cash flows will prove complicated
enough to occupy us for a while.

People familiar with the financial industry know that a lot of actual
investment propositions do not rely on any careful analysis of cash
flows. Within our frame of mind, this is not very reassuring ... to say
the least.

