--- 
layout: post 
title: Zero Coupon Contracts 
author: Guillaume Rabault
categories: [Finance]
tags: [Instruments] 
fullview: false 
--- 

*This post introduces zero
coupon contracts, contracts which promise a single payment at a fixed
date $T$. Truthful to [this introductory
post](/finance/2013/02/25/what-is-a-financial-asset.html "What is a financial asset"),
the price process is derived backwards. The terminal pay-off is modeled
as a random variable usually not known before maturity. The price
process is then defined as adapted to the filtration, with a drift which
is the instantaneous expected return and converging to the terminal
pay-off at maturity. This is an example of a very simple backward
stochastic differential equation. The data of the zero coupon contract
is the terminal pay-off and the drift (expected return) process. A key
component of the solution is the volatility of the price process, which
can be related to the data of the problem.*

* * * * *

Introduction
============

This note introduces a stylized financial contract, the zero coupon
contract. The simple structure of this contract allows to discuss price
dynamics without being bogged down in unnecessary complexity. The
important features of price dynamics stand out clearly. We will see that
price dynamics should be conceived as the solution to a terminal value
problem. This will lead us to introduce the concept of a backward
stochastic differential equation. This approach should be contrasted
with the usual practice of specifying ad-hoc forward dynamics.

A financial contract is the promise of a stream of payments, usually
spread across several periods. This latter feature creates analytical
challenges. We will instead assume that our contract specifies a single
payment at a given date $T$. This is what we call a **zero coupon
contract**.

In the day to day practice of plain vanilla finance, the range of
questions raised by the potential buyer of the contract is, 'what is
this payment likely to be? How uncertain is it? What is the worst case?
What is the best case? How likely is the worst case? How likely is the
best case?'. Once these questions have been answered (qualitatively at
least), the buyer can judge whether the current price is attractive or
not, i.e. whether the contract has the right return to risk
characteristics. He will be able to form expectations on the
distribution of the return to maturity. If the contract is liquid, the
buyer can raise the same questions tomorrow and the day after, given the
observed behavior of the market price. He can form short term
expectations of the return. The realized short term return will be made
up of its expected value and a surprise. This surprise will perhaps
correspond to a change in the likely terminal payment. If not, the buyer
will be able to conclude that the expected return to maturity has
changed.

Zero coupon dynamics: the fundamental solution
==============================================

To be relevant, modeling should closely mimic the above logic. To be
specific, I'll assume that uncertainty in the model is driven by a
Brownian motion $B=(B_{t})_{t \in [0,T]}$ and that the filtration
$\cal{F}$ is the minimal filtration generated by $B$ and satisfying
the usual conditions. I now proceed to introduce the relevant
mathematical objects. The terminal payment is an ${\cal F}_{T}-$
measurable random variable $X_{T}$. Technically, we impose the square
integrability and strict positivity (almost surely) of $X_{T}$. The
technical conditions should make sure that we can apply the [martingale
representation
theorem](/math/2013/10/27/martingale-representation.html "MARTINGALE REPRESENTATION").
We also need all processes to be almost surely strictly positive to
formulate dynamics in a geometric way.

At a given date $0 \leq t \leq T$, the expectation of the terminal
payment is $E_{t}[X_{T}]$ which we will denote by $X_{t}$. What
is the dynamics of $(X_{t})_{t \in [0,T]}$? This process is a
martingale and the [martingale representation
theorem](/math/2013/10/27/martingale-representation.html "MARTINGALE REPRESENTATION")
tells us that there is an adapted process $\zeta=(\zeta_{t})_{t
\in [0,T]}$ such
that:$$X_{t}=X_{0}+\int_{0}^{t}\zeta_{u}dB_{u}.$$ This can
be written in differential form: $$dX_{t}=\zeta_{t}dB_{t}.$$
This makes it clear that $\zeta_{t}$ measures the change in the
expectation $E_{t}[X_{T}]$ that results from the shock $dB_{t}$.
To stress the backward angle to expectations dynamics, we note that
expectations satisfy the
equation:$$X_{t}=X_{T}-\int_{t}^{T}\zeta_{u}dB_{u}.$$ This
emphasizes the fact that expectations converge to the terminal variable
$X_{T}$ which is the key piece of data in this problem. Finally,
$X$ is strictly positive and we can write
$\eta_{t}=\zeta_{t}/X_{t}$. The process $\eta$ is called
volatility process and the dynamics is determined by a geometric
stochastic differential
equation:$$\frac{dX_{t}}{X_{t}}=\eta_{t}dB_{t}.$$

A historically important model of asset price dynamics is obtained when
$P_{t}=X_{t}=E_{t}[X_{T}]$. In this case, the price dynamics are
determined by a stochastic integral. At any point in time, the price is
expected to remain constant and all its fluctuations come from revisions
in the expected value of the terminal payment. Periods where
$\eta_{t}$ is low (respectively high) correspond to periods where
the newsflow on the terminal payment is light (resp. heavy). We will
call $(X_{t})_{t \in [0,T]}$ {\bf the fundamental solution} of the
zero coupon contract.

The case of a constant expected return
======================================

A more realistic model assumes that the financial contract has a
constant positive expected return $r$. We now have to modify the price
dynamics. We assume that the price process is adapted and follows a
geometric diffusion with drift
$r$:$$\frac{dP_{t}}{P_{t}}=rdt+Z_{t}dB_{t}.$$ We still want
to complete this with the requisite that the price process at date $T$
equals the terminal payment $X_{T}$, any other value leading to an
unrealistic arbitrage. We would therefore hope to be able to specify the
complete dynamics with the terminal condition
as:$$\frac{dP_{t}}{P_{t}}=rdt+Z_{t}dB_{t},\,P_{T}=X_{T}$$
The stochastic differential equation is really the shorthand
for:$$P_{t}=P_{0}+\int_{0}^{t}rP_{u}du+\int_{0}^{t}Z_{u}P_{u}du,$$
and, to emphasize the terminal value condition, we can
write:$$P_{t}=X_{T}-\int_{t}^{T}rP_{u}du-\int_{t}^{T}Z_{u}P_{u}du.$$

A natural candidate for a solution
is:$$P_{t}=\exp(-r(T-t))X_{t}=E_{t}[\exp(-r(T-t))X_{T}],$$ and
this indeed works. It is easily checked by applying Ito:
$$d(\exp(-r(T-t))X_{t})=r\exp(-r(T-t))X_{t}dt+\exp(-r(T-t))X_{t}\eta_{t}dB_{t},$$
or: $$dP_{t}=rP_{t}dt+\eta_{t}P_{t}dB_{t}.$$ We have thus
found a solution to our problem, with $Z_{t}=\eta_{t}$, i.e. the
volatility of the fundamental solution. This solution rises in
expectations at a rate $r$ and its fluctuations entirely reflect
revisions of the terminal payment $X_{T}$.

The case of an exogenous expected return
========================================

We now assume we have a stochastic expected return process
$(r_{t})_{t \in [0,T]}$. For the given terminal payment $X_{T}$
and the given expected return process $(r_{t})_{t \in [0,T]}$ (the
data), we are looking for an adapted price process $(P_{t})_{t \in
[0,T]}$ with an adapted volatility function $(Z_{t})_{t \in
[0,T]}$ such that:
$$\frac{dP_{t}}{P_{t}}=r_{t}dt+Z_{t}dB_{t},\,P_{T}=X_{T}.$$
In integral form, we are trying to solve:
$$P_{t}=X_{T}-\int_{t}^{T}r_{u}P_{u}du-\int_{t}^{T}Z_{u}P_{u}du.$$
This is an instance of a **backward stochastic differential equation**.

We observe that if there is a solution, we should have the following
representation:
$$P_{t}=E_{t}[\exp(-\int_{t}^{T}r_{u}du)X_{T}].$$ Note that
this is indeed equivalent to:
$$\exp(-\int_{0}^{t}r_{u}du)P_{t}=E_{t}[\exp(-\int_{0}^{T}r_{u}du)X_{T}]=E_{t}[\exp(-\int_{0}^{T}r_{u}du)P_{T}],$$
but then if $P$ and $Z$ are solutions, the left hand side has to be
a martingale (apply Ito) which means that the above equation should hold
for any solution.

As for existence, it directly follows from the above observation. The
variable $Y_{t}=E_{t}[\exp(-\int_{0}^{T}r_{u}du)X_{T}]$
defines a continuous martingale. It can be represented as a Brownian
integral:$$dY_{t}=Y_{t}Z_{t}dB_{t}.$$ If we define $P_{t}$
through $P_{t}=\exp(\int_{0}^{t}r_{u}du)Y_{t}$ and we apply
Ito, we get:$$dP_{t}=r_{t}P_{t}dt+Z_{t}P_{t}dB_{t}.$$ We have
thus found a solution to our simple backward stochastic differential
equation.

In all cases we have seen, the volatility of the price is determined by
the volatility of the martingale
$(E_{t}[\exp(-\int_{0}^{T}r_{u}du)X_{T}])_{t \in [0,T]}$.
When $(r_{t})_{t \in [0,T]}$ is deterministic, this is the same
thing as the volatility of the martingale $(E_{t}[X_{T}])_{t \in
[0,T]}$, i.e. fundamental volatility. But in general, it is not. We
will come back to this in a later post.

Summary
=======

We have thus found a description of the price process which sticks to
the financial logic. What drives the dynamics is two things:

-   revisions of the terminal pay-off, as reflected in the dynamics of
    the fundamental solution $(X_{t})_{t \in [0,T]}$,
-   changes in the expected return.

These two items determine the volatility function of the price process.
We will see that price volatility obeys an accounting identity that
links it to the two items above. There is thus more structure that in a
traditional forward stochastic differential equation. As argued above,
this structure is ideally suited to raising investment questions.

Note: A short and clear introduction to backward stochastic differential
equation, Hu[2013] can be found
[here](http://hkqf.se.cuhk.edu.hk/sites/default/files/BSDEHK.pdf).

References: Hu Y., 2013, *Backward [Stochastic Differential Equations
and Applications in
Finance](http://hkqf.se.cuhk.edu.hk/sites/default/files/BSDEHK.pdf)*,
Lecture Notes, Rennes University.

